---
title: My values
draft: false
tags:
  - Philosophy
date: 2023-08-08
categories:
  - Career development
authors:
  - ksaaskil
---

# My values

"You have good values." This is one of the nicest things anyone could say to me. Values tell who we are and what we think is important. If my coworkers can see my values in how I behave, I think I have succeeded in my working career.

<!-- more -->

In this post, I'd like to briefly explain the values that drive me forward in my career. Jobs, roles and projects may change, but values remain.

## Take care of yourself

Physical and mental wellbeing are pivotal to enjoying life. We spend a large part of our life at work, so enjoying life directly improves our wellbeing at work. It is very hard to be effective at work when feeling bad.

Getting to know myself better promotes my mental wellbeing. I want to learn what makes me happy and what makes me feel worse. By knowing myself I am more likely to lead a happy life and do things that I enjoy.

Physical wellbeing requires regular exercise and taking care of my body. I tend to carry a lot of stress in my body. Physical exercise directly reduces stress levels and improves the quality of my work.

I want to build a healthy self-esteem. People with healthy self-esteem are more likely to form healthy teams. Bad self-esteem gives room for inflated ego, which can make healthy teamwork impossible. I want to get better at keeping my ego in bay.

## Lead by example

I want to lead by example. I believe I have a lot to give to my working community no matter where I work. I have put a lot of effort to become a better colleague. I want to do actions that promote a culture of quality, respect, trust and transparency.

Leadership is not the same thing as management. Anyone can be a leader irrespective of their role. For example, a colleague with a positive and enthusiastic attitude can be a leader in her team.

## Keep learning

I love learning. I love reading books and watching presentations. I love learning from my colleagues.

I enjoy teaching and sharing my knowledge. Teaching is one of the most effective ways to learn and get better at any subject. By learning and expanding my skills, I have also new things to teach and share.

I have a lot to learn from my colleagues. Knowing and accepting myself as I am makes it possible for me to be humble and open to new ideas. Vulnerability is a key to getting better.
